MARISHA: I felt like I should have an epic
entrance and go get the chair. Hi guys. How's it
going? I'm just going to sit. It's more casual,
more comfortable. Hi everybody! How's it going?
Good? Everyone having fun? I am Marisha Ray, for
anyone that doesn't know me. I'm a voice actor, an
actress, a host, producer, writer, and I'm on Geek
& Sundry's Critical Role.
(cheering)
MARISHA: This is my panel, "How To Kick Ass and
Take Names," which is basically me talking about
myself, which is always awkward and weird, so I
generally open it up to questions pretty early on,
and we just chat! We just talk about things. Yeah,
a few of the things I've done: you can hear me in
games like Star Wars Battlefront, Metal Gear
Solid: Phantom Pain, Persona as Margaret,
and most recently Fire Emblem: Fates!
(cheering)
MARISHA: As Mikoto, Oboro and Effie. You can see
me in shows like Super Power Beat Down, which is
super fun, and Batgirl: Spoiled, and, yeah, that's
enough about me. That's fine. You can just look up
the rest. I do a little bit of everything.
Everything from stunt work, to writing and
producing. In Los Angeles, that's what we call
surviving. You can't say no to jobs, so if someone
is like, "Hey can you grip?", you're just like,
"Ha! It's cool, Hey, man, what the shit is that?
"Google it real fast, okay, just mainly got to set
up lights. No idea how to light things, all
"right." That's how you learn things. Experience is
key. You always learn more with experience. I
moved to Los Angeles when I was 18, like a crazy
person, and ate a lot of ramen, and suffered on
public transportation. Homeless people smell
really bad sometimes. I did crazy stuff. I've done
crazy things. I've got a lot of stories. Why don't
we ask questions? Because questions are fun,
although I'm sitting up here rambling. By the way,
having a Creeper right in front is really
unnerving. It's like jack-in-a-box.
It can happen any moment!
Okay, has anyone got any questions? Yeah?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: What was it like to work on MGS?
MARISHA: On Metal Gear Solid? Metal Gear Solid was
amazing and actually I am a massive Metal Gear
fan. When I found out I got that one I was like
(excited noises). Going into the booth every day
was like (excited noises). It was phenomenal. You
can actually recruit me and play with me.
(laughter) That was even more fun, I'm playable.
What was that?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: That sounds pretty weird that I
can play with you.
MARISHA: Yeah, you can play with me. You can shoot
me or play with me. It's like the American dichotomy.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: Yeah, pick one. Good line. That one was
funny because the director on that one, Kris
Zimmerman, is incredible, she's directed a ton of
video games and is a good friend of Matt and I's.
There were a few times where lines would come out,
that a director and voiceover are there to give
you context because you don't have a full script.
It's not like continuous screenplay, like a
theater or on camera. So you're generally just
getting your lines. The director is there to
provide context, and some Metal Gear Solid lines,
out of context, are really fucking weird. It came
up where-- she's like, "Okay, so the character,
Solid Snake." I'm like, "Uh-huh." She's like, "He
"does this thing where he hides in cardboard boxes,
and he--", and I'm like, "All right, I got it, I
"got it. It's great. Oh my god, I'm so excited." It
was probably still one of my favorite experiences
that I've worked on to date because I'm such a
fangirl.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Did you feel like you connected
with the character?
MARISHA: Soldier Number One, super connected,
Soldier Number One. Yeah, soldier battle shouty
stuff. It’s kind of Snake. Snake is the main
character there. (laughter) Most of it is
soldiers. So, sure. Do we have another question?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Who would win, Batman or
Superman?
(laughter)
MARISHA: Wait, what?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Who would win in a fight, Batman
or Superman?
MARISHA: I mean, aren’t they coming out with a
movie about that?
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: No.
MARSHA: Yeah, Batman vs Superman, and yes they
are! Ben Affleck.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Oh, he’s cute. No, seriously, who
would win?
MARISHA: I’m a Batman fan.
(cheering)
MARISHA: How about this? Batman wins because of
character development and story arc. How’s that?
I like my flawed characters. I’ll take them.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: He’s a broken child.
MARISHA: What was that?
MARISHA: Well, wouldn’t you be if you saw your
parents get shot when you were a child?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: No.
MARISHA: No? Wait, no? I’m going to go out on
a limb here and say I don’t believe that.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Okay, I’d be sad, but I’d wake
up the next day and I’d have all of that money.
(laughs) It’s a silver lining.
MARISHA: What’s your name?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: John Dunn.
MARISHA: Ladies, if you’re looking for a man who
knows where his priorities lie, John Dunn is back
there at the go. Next question, yes?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Are you planning on doing any
other Super Power Beat Downs with Nightwing?
MARISHA: What’s that? Super Power Beat Down,
something about Nightwing?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Are you planning on doing another
one?
MARISHA: Oh, are we planning to make another with
Nightwing? Because we have one with Nightwing.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: Yeah, we're always doing more Super Power
Beat Down. The problem with Super Power Beat Down
is that the visual effects in it are pretty
extensive. It's just one guy because we're still
making a web series with very little money. Yes,
it's insane. His name is Nikolai. He's actually
based out of Ukraine, which is even more awesome.
There's no way we could be anything like a weekly
show or anything like that because the effects and
the shoots that we are doing are so extensive. The
combat, the stunt work, and so much post goes into
it. A ton of people are always like, "(whiny
"voice) Why is it taking so long for Super Power
Beat Down?" and I'm like, "Shut up and enjoy your
"free content!" Yeah, that's why they take some
time, but they're worth it, right? They're totally
worth it because they're pretty stellar at the
end. For anyone who's not familiar with Super
Power Beat Down is a show that I host with Damian
Beurer on Machinima, and we take two superheroes
generally from different universes across fandom,
Marvel vs DC type of a thing, and put them in a
fight and see who wins and the audience votes to
see who decides. What we always do is we always
shoot both endings and then whatever the audience
decides is what goes in. I mean, sometimes I'm
like, "I disagree, but all right, sure, that's
what they want to see." Sometimes it's more of a
popularity contest, not going to lie, but I will
say the comments on Super Power Beat Down are
phenomenal because it's like anger, nerd rage
"Ugh! Wolverine would totally shoot Spawn because
"regeneration powers would totally, ugh!" It's just
brilliant, the anger because of these fictional
battles. It's phenomenal. Good one.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: What's that?
MARISHA: We do sometimes. I think it depends.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: When they’re close, we will because if
it's not close then-- it's more of a special thing
that we tend to do, because I feel like if we
released the alternate ending for all of them it
would ruin the point of the show if we did it
all the time. It would be like, “Oh well this is
"more of a Choose Your Own Adventure than an actual
debate.” They take work. If we release the
alternate ending, it means we have to put post
work into that alternate ending. We'll shoot it
and wait to see who wins. Some of them, they're
not finished, so we don't use it because it takes
a lot of time. Seeing Deadpool explode, for that
half a second shot of him exploding, that's a
couple weeks of computer, you know? It's different
when it's Marvel and Disney and they have
multi-million dollars and then they're still
hiring ILM, and all these other studios to do
certain effects. That's why you see the credits at
the end of Avengers, it's like eight different
special effects houses because it takes a lot.
Next question?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: You’re a champion. My savior. (laughs)
Sabat. I love him. What kind of hijinks do we get
into with other voice actors? Well, before it was
public, Dungeons & Dragons. For those who weren't
aware, Critical Role was our personal game for
about two years before we started the show. We
were legit doing it because we really enjoyed it.
Why it works now and why it's so great, because
the dynamics were already established. I mean, we
do so much crazy stuff, and it is like a small
industry once you're in it so we know like half
the people. You'll have to ask Matt when he gets
up here next. A few years ago for his birthday, we
threw an HP Lovecraft murder mystery birthday
party and gave everybody characters and it was
like a four hour puzzle escape room, it was like a
real life Mansions of Madness or like a real life
Arkham Horror, for those who know. It was
phenomenal, but we commit 100 percent. We're like
no, you have to be in costume, and “We’re there.
"Totally.” The Ren Faire is always a blast, but
because we're actors and we're all super nerdy,
going to Ren Faire we get in full costume and then
we pick characters and talk in British accents the
whole time and get drunk off mead. It's crazy,
it's late, it's nuts. It's a fun life.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: Nope! That's like walking into a trap.
Maybe after a few drinks. (laughs)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: (laughs) Next question.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: What is the job that was the
funnest or most unusual?
MARISHA: The most unusual or the funnest random
jobs kind of a thing? Like a random job, stumble
into sort of thing? AD can actually be fun, if you
are an AD you are essentially the on-set dick that
moves everyone and keeps everyone on task. So
sometimes most ADs on set we were like, "Ugh,
"fucking asshole," and like honestly people are
like, "That guy's a fucking asshole" because he's
doing his job. You can be still a fun AD and it is
your job to be like, "Ha ha ha, that was fun,
"right? That was fun, but okay seriously we have to
get this shot in the next three minutes so stop
"joking now and shoot." It can be really fun but
also really hectic because the AD essentially does
everything that the director can't do at the time,
so honestly the ADs are the real on-set heroes
and, yes, way more like a stage director. Exactly.
They're orchestrating the whole thing. Because the
director's job is to sit back behind the camera
and talk to the actors. It’s his vision that he’s
trying capture. If the director needs actors on
set, you’re the one who’s screaming, you're the
one screaming, “Quiet on set!” You’re the one
doing everything else that everyone else’s job can
fall on is the job of the AD. It’s a blast. I
really enjoy it. Most unusual job? Oh man. My
first, no, that’s not true. My first real job in
Los Angeles, I was canvassing for the Democratic
National Committee. My second was street
performer. So that was fun. I’ve got stories. I
could probably write a book. You see a lot when
you’re standing on the street. Yeah. I’ll end that
there. Yes, in the back!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Do you ever get tempted to look
at Matthew’s notes before a game?
MARISHA: Do I ever get tempted to look at Matt’s
notes before a game? No, and I’m pretty sure if I
did, I wouldn’t be living any more. You’d find my
body somewhere. And no, because that’s cheating.
It’s like peeking before Christmas. But, no. That
is actually the thing I get questioned and accused
of the most is, “Oh, you know, she’s dating the
DM, so she’s got to know everything." I’m like,
“No, I actually really try hard to shield my eyes
through the house as he’s working on things.” So
yeah. No, because that’s part of the game. It’s
way more fun to be in the moment and immersed and
as surprised when everyone else is. Yeah!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: Advice for an aspiring voice actor.
First, become an actor. You have take acting
classes. Legit acting classes. Theater. Improv is
also very helpful. Take acting classes because
that’s where you get the technique. Like in dance,
when they always make you take ballet because
that’s where you get technique, that’s where you
get your form. Also, I think voice acting is just
a subdivision of acting, of performing. Acting
classes, acting classes, acting classes. Also,
start recording yourself and listening to yourself
a lot because listening to your own voice is going
to throw you a very long time. Eventually, when
you start getting in booths, they put headsets on
you and you’re hearing yourself as you’re talking
and actually performing. There’s a lot of newbies
that get in the booth for the first time and start
hearing themselves. Because everyone hates how
they sound. Every voice actor fucking hates their
voice, by the way. Just throwing that out there.
You never get used to it, but you kind of have to,
so you start listening to yourself. My other
advice would be to not limit yourself. Say, “I
want to be a voice actor,” that’s like being like,
“I’m going to be a charcoal sketch artist. I don’t
want to touch any other mediums. I just only ever
"want to work in charcoal.” It’s fine if charcoal’s
your forte, but most other visual artists will
probably stretch their legs and try other things,
and you should, too. Just like visual art
medium, improv, oral speech, accent training,
theater, all of that will only help strengthen
your voice acting. It’s training in all mediums.
Don’t limit yourself because you never know, you
might work really hard, get to voice acting and be
like, “Eh. I think a like black box theater
"better.” And that’s great! That’s fine. Think of
it more as an arc. It’s acting, it’s not just
voice acting. Never limit yourself. Yeah. Does
that answer that? Does that help a little bit?
Yeah. Next question.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Who’s your archenemy?
MARISHA: Who’s my archenemy?! In real life or in
my imaginary one?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Both!
MARISHA: My archenemy in real life is probably
myself, my own self-loathing and insecurities that
I deal with all the time because it takes a lot of
energy to hate other people, man. It takes a lot.
So I wouldn’t say I had any archenemies. There are
people that I’m like, "Eh, no, your negative
"energy, I don’t like it, good,” so I don’t. I try
not to obsess. I feel like hating someone takes a
lot of meditation on negative energy. In my
imaginary life? Same answer. Does that kind of
answer your question? He's like, "I'm not
satisfied, but sure. Not really, but I guess."
Okay, next question. You. Yes, you. You raised
your hand.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: I was, actually. Hang on one second. I
put on like eight layers. It's good. What was the
question? Oh, was I a nerd? Yes, I was actually. I
was a huge video game nerd and a comic book nerd
as well, I was a DC girl for a really long time.
Yeah, my first system was an NES when I started
playing video games when I was three. Favorite
system was probably OG PlayStation. Favorite video
game of all time and the game that's probably
responsible for making me like a core gamer to
this day was Tomb Raider. I fucking love that
game, Tomb 2 was amazing. Yeah, and I actually had
no idea-- When I came to Los Angeles I wasn't
pursuing voice acting or hosting in a video game
universe or nerd geekdom culture stuff at all. I
went to college for acting, moved to LA and was
auditioning and doing the grind, hitting the
pavement, sending in headshots, and after about a
year of that and not really making any headway, I
was like, "This is stupid, this is lame because
"nothing is happening," so I joined an improv
class. Just because. I still try to keep going to
classes to better yourself. So I joined an improv
class and there I met a girl who worked for a
company called [inaudible] Online as well as a few
other companies, and she was also did video game
journalism on her spare time and was a cosplayer,
loved cosplaying, and I overheard her in an improv
class one day. I hadn't met her beforehand, and I
was like, "Are you talking about a video game?"
She was like, "Yeah!" I don't know, she was
talking about something specific at the time, I
don't know, it was like, "Wait, are you talking
about Assassin's Creed?" and she was like, "Oh my
"god, yes." Something like that, and then I went
and I sat next to her and then from there she was
like, "Hey, do you want to write for my site? You
don't really get paid, but you might get free
"promo copies for video games every once and
awhile." I was like, "Oh my god, yes. Free video
"games, heck yeah!" By the way, that I don't think
that ever happened, because like they rarely do
that. They're assholes about that sometimes, video
game companies. So that was a false promise. But
from there, I started doing on-camera hosting work
with her, and then I met other nerds and we just
started shooting nerd-based sketches. It slowly
became an amalgam of these two things that I loved
and that was awesome. Like I said, I didn't really
try it, I just followed what I was enjoying, to be
totally honest. Like I said, I started writing for
her for free because I thought I was going to get
free games, and then one thing led to another and
I started hosting because they were like, "You
"know about video games and you can talk into a
microphone. People can understand you. That's
"great. Will you get on camera?" I was like, "I
don't know." I had no idea what I was doing, I had
no idea. Then I just started meeting people and
working the video game press side of things. I
started meeting a ton of voice actors and
directors and one thing really just led to
another. Once you fall into a crowd and start
meeting everyone in that adjacent crowd-- once you
find your flock, it's all about finding your
flock. I was probably in LA for two years with
just nothing, starving, working on the streets,
literally. Not as a prostitute.
(laughter)
MARISHA: ...but almost; as a street performer,
begging for tips. I wasn't begging. I never
begged. It was crazy. I literally kept being like,
"Yeah, you want me to be Princess Leia in your
"sketch? Sure, I mean, that's fine. I'll do it for
free.” Never turn down free work, I will say that.
Know your worth. There's a difference. Know your
worth, but I will still do free projects if I
think it's going to be fun and enjoyable.
Sometimes those projects, those indie projects
that they can't pay you for, are ones where
they'll let you take more extreme choices as an
artist. They're willing to let you play a little
bit more and those can be very fulfilling, and you
never know who's watching. Plus, you never know
who that guy is going to be in ten years. I
actually had an amazing moment when we were at
Wizard World in Portland these past couple
weekends; Critical Role was there. It was a
convention in Portland. A bunch of guys, some
gaming guys, were there and I did shitty YouTube
videos and we were scum together. We were internet
scum. They were up on stage with a panel and had a
huge line and we were up on stage with Critical
Role and I saw them later and was like, "Guys! Hey
guys, I'm so proud of you, because remember when
"we were all garbage? When we were all nobodies and
we were all struggling?" and they were like,
"Dude, we were literally just talking about that
when you guys were on your panel." I'm like,
"Yeah!" It's a hierarchy. As long as you keep
working with people who are busting your ass,
hopefully you all start getting elevated together.
Luckily we've hit that point and we're all the
friends that I did shitty YouTube videos with
five, six years ago, and they kept busting their
ass and now it slowly pays off. But yeah, it's a
struggle. Sorry, that was a bit of a tangent. But,
yes. Or no. I don't remember your original
question. Yeah! Okay, next question. That was a
good question, though. Yeah, you. Have you already
asked a question? No, okay, go ahead.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: Good question. I do have some in mind. I
have a few ideas. None of us-- we get asked this
question a lot and none of us really want to say
anything in case we all inevitably die. We still
want it to be a surprise, but I will say I might
have a bard lined up, maybe. I also have a cleric,
which is pretty fun. I've got options. Yes, you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I have a very quick question. The
bird's name is Dagon.
MARISHA: Dagon, yep.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Is that a Lovecraft reference?
MARISHA: Yes it is. Ding ding ding!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Okay, just making sure because
that is not a common name at all.
MARISHA: Yep, we named our bird after Dagon, the
Old God of the Deep Ones.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Follow up, do you have any
favorite Lovecraft stories?
MARISHA: Do I have any favorite Lovecraft stories?
I actually really love The Dunwich Horror short
story. Of course, The Call of Cthulhu is classic,
great. (nerdy voice) A must-read if, I say so
myself. I really like Dunwich Horror, that cult in
Louisiana, with lots of bigotry in some of the
stories, but it's great! Not that I'm condoning
bigotry, by the way, or saying that I like
bigotry, because that's not true.
Yeah, fedora.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Who are your biggest role models
[inaudible]?
MARISHA: Some of my biggest fror my performing
point of view... Ironically, Vin Diesel.
Meeting him was incredible and we did
D&Diesel, if anyone has seen that through Geek &
Sundry. We played with a couple of people from
Critical Role and Matt got the amazing joy of
dungeon mastering for Vin Diesel. I was actually a
big fan of him for a while, and really admired
him, because he moved to Los Angeles, failed, had
to move back to New York, moved to Los Angeles
again, failed, had to move back to New York. So he
wrote, directed, and produced, and starred in his
own short film. It got accepted into Sundance,
Steven Spielberg noticed him, and then put him in
Saving Private Ryan. So if you ever go back and
watch Saving Private Ryan, you see he dies pretty
early on. Spoiler alert! It’s a 20 year old
movie!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: You can’t just do that!
MARISHA: (laughter) Yeah, and that was his first
major role. I knew early on that he was a huge D&D
nerd, and took a lot of cues from fantasy and from
Dungeons & Dragons and later he was like, "Oh
"yeah, I’m totally bisexual.” I’m like, "Dude,
you’re fucking dope as shit! You’re the coolest
"person on this world!” I don’t know, he was just
awesome, and I really admired his story, and I
like people who are self-made. Hearing his story
was-- Because I started writing and shooting my
own web series when I was staying in Los Angeles
for a year and a half and nothing was happening. I
was like, “Fine, I’ll just start making stuff on
my own,” and I did. It made all the difference in
the world, because as soon as people see that
you’re putting in effort towards your own career,
and you’re at least trying, that’s what people
notice and that’s what people like. So don’t be
afraid to do that. Part of the reason why I did
Batgirl: Spoiled is because I was starting to get
typecast really fast. As like, (Valley girl voice)
ditzy girl next door, middle America, a little
vapid and I was like, “Ugh, this is dumb.” My
agent kept sending me out for cheerleader and I
was like, "No!” I had a background in some martial
arts and wanted to do more action-y, gritty stuff.
I was like, “I can do this,” but no one could see
it. Casting directors are the least imaginative
people in the industry, which is the worst place
for that flaw to be. Casting directors, I find,
can’t see past your eight by ten, your headshot.
So I had a hard time getting past this, they were
like, “No, we don’t see action star, we don’t see
gritty heroin addict. You can’t do any of that.”
I’m like, “No, that’s not true,” so I went, “Fuck
it, I’ll do it myself,” and got a team together
and we started producing Batgirl: Spoiled. Got a
cease and desist after two episodes, but that
opened up so many doors in my career. Actually now
people associate me more as being more action-y,
superhero-type persona girl, instead of the ditzy
girl next door thing that I was getting stuck in
for a while. It’s amazing what a photograph can do
to your image. It’s amazing what you can do with a
little bit of makeup, changing your look a little
bit. People believe what they see in front of them
and sometimes you have to show them. So if you
want to go out for a nerdy character, and you
don’t really look the part, put on some glasses
and hold a manga and take a picture and send that
instead of your plain, generic eight by ten and I
guarantee you’ll see way more results. Or send
both! I started doing that, too, “Here’s a picture
of me in the short film where I played a heroin addict.”
Yeah, crazy how wrecked I can look,
right? Here’s my eight by ten. It started changing
everything. Just start breaking rules, because
they say, “You need an eight by ten. You need a
"commercial where you’re smiling, and you need a
theatrical where you’re just-- Those are the two
"looks, that’s what we need. We want you to be a
blank slate.” Walk in, “I’m a blank slate. You can
"do anything--” No. No one can see it. People don’t
like to work to imagine things anymore. So
sometimes you’ve got to throw it in their face,
and don’t be afraid to. Wow, that was another
tangent, wasn’t it? Okay, next. Yeah? What?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thank you!
MARISHA: Thank you, good question! Another
question? Yes? What?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: You mean in terms of their beliefs in
Civil War?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Which team would you be on?
MARISHA: I’d be team Iron Man.
(cheering)
MARISHA: Captain’s a bit of a boy scout. It’s
tough. Iron Man all the way. What’s that?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Who needs superpowers when you’ve
got money?
MARISHA: Wait, what’s that? What superhero?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Who needs superpowers when you’ve
got money?
MARISHA: What superpowers would I have?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Who need superpowers--
MARISHA: Oh! Who needs superpowers when you’ve got
money? Word. Yeah, Iron Man and Batman teaching
that lesson left and right. Okay, next question.
Yes?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: Keyleth is very inexperienced. Keyleth is
still trying to figure out who she is. She’s never
even-- Kashaw-- This is Critical Role talk by the
way, if everyone’s not caught up, spoilers? Sorry.
You won’t remember this when you catch up anyway,
it’s fine. They’re going to drink tonight. Don’t
lie. She’s still trying to figure out who she is,
she doesn’t know, maybe. To be honest, I don’t
know yet. I’m learning with Keyleth. Kashaw was
her first kiss, because she’s been stuck in the
mountains her whole life. This is her first soirée
unto the world. She’s still figuring out herself
and I think she’s going to have to do that before
she can really start pursuing interests in other
people, which is why the whole Vax/Keyleth thing
has been tough. She has these feelings that are
new to her and she doesn’t understand what they
are. Ever been in love for the first time?
Remember when you were like, "Is this love? Maybe
it’s not. What does this mean?” Then you dump him
two weeks later and you’re like, "Fuck that guy,
that wasn’t love!” You don’t know! Then the next
guy you’re like, "Wait, is this it? Oh god!” Then
he breaks your heart and you’re like, (sobbing)
“That’s love!” She doesn’t know. She has no clue
yet, and I don’t either. The crazy thing with
Keyleth and Dungeons & Dragons is it’s like we’ve
been playing a three-year long long-form improv.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: Oh a hundred percent, yeah. Amazing book
I recommend called Me, Myself and Why by Jennifer
Ouellette. It’s a life science book on the science
of yourself. You can’t say it’s a self-help book,
but it’s the first book I’ve read that made me not
feel like a freak of nature, because everyone
feels that way. Everyone’s like, “Ugh, these weird
mannerisms, and I’ve got this weird thing I do
when I go home and I can’t tell anybody about it
because it’s shame.” Everyone has
weird things about them.
Then you read Me, Myself, and Why and
you're like, "Oh, it's genetic. Oh, everyone's a
"freak of nature! Great. Awesome." It's a great
book. In the book, she goes into everything from
the science of being a lightweight, to sexuality,
to tastebud mutation, to if there actually is a
soul-- physical or metaphysical. She also goes
into avatars, like in World of Warcraft or Second
Life or RPGs. She has a section where she's
talking about what is happening in your brain when
you play RPGs, or when you have an avatar. One of
the things that she talks about is when they go
back, and when people tell stories, and they put
them in a EEG machine, or put them through an MRI
and they're doing brain scans, and they start to
tell stories about when they were this avatar--
when they were this other person-- and the
memories register in the exact same part of the
brain and in the exact same way your memories do
in real life. They're all stored in the same part
of your brain. At the end of the day, all we have
are our memories. So, if our memories when we're
not real people versus our memories from real life
are essentially the same-- I know, right? Mind
blowing. We'll talk as a group-- the Critical Role
group-- and if you have played in any D&D campaign
that you've been playing-- If anyone's not playing
D&D or has never played a roleplaying game, highly
recommend it. It's incredibly fulfilling, and you
learn a lot about yourself. It's an amazing thing
that you cannot buy or replicate with a video
game. I love video games. Nothing to do with video
games, totally different type of experience. When
we talk with the Critical Role group, and at the
end of the game we still will go out to bars and
we'll be like, (sobbing) "Rest in peace, carpet."
You know? To quantify it, actually, someone asked
me on Twitter-- I get this question a lot, any
time I cry on the show, which, embarrassingly,
happens a lot, and when the stuff went down with
the Fire Ashari-- once again, spoilers-- Fire
Ashari happened, trying to be vague, and I got
really upset. People started tweeting at me, being
like, "Were you actually upset, or were you just
"acting?" I was like, (pause) "Yes? Yes, both?"
It's all real. When Laura cries because Trinket
goes down, she's legitimately upset that Trinket
went down; she's not acting upset. She's like, "Oh
"my god, my bear just died." It's upsetting. So
it's hard to say, but I essentially share half a
brain with Keyleth. Like I said, it's great,
because when we're going through the game, I'm
experiencing the storyline for two people, because
I'll have my opinions, but then Keyleth also has
her opinions, and she's her own person now that,
in a way, lives and breathes on her own. We'll
still talk about stories, about things that
happened in game, and we're all laughing and
joking like they actually happened, because they
did. They really did. What's that?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: [inaudible]
MARISHA: Another really good tangent. Thank you.
Sorry, getting existential on you guys now. Man, sorry.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: What's your favorite and least
favorite Keyleth moments?
MARISHA: Favorite and least favorite Keyleth
moments. Leaping down off of the magic carpet and
transforming into an earth elemental in air and
then kicking a beholder in the face was pretty
dope. Pretty all about that one, that was great.
She's got great moments. First kiss with Kashaw
was great. Least favorite Keyleth moments? I'm
pretty sure Keyleth is probably the most
polarizing character on our show. People seem to
either love her or hate her. There are choices
that Keyleth makes that I, as Marisha, don't agree
with, but they happen because, I'm acting
synonymously at the same time. It's really hard to
describe sometimes. There are some times when
she'll make a choice and I'm like, "You twat."
Least favorite Keyleth moments. That's a good
question. There's a few times where I wish-- It's
hard, because I think there are more in my head,
because a lot of times it's more moments where I
wish she would've stood up or wish she would've
been a stronger person and put her foot down, and
I didn't. I wish I would've put my foot down, or
Keyleth would've put her foot down, a little bit
harder about going back into General Krieg's house
to try and find the extra loot when Scanlan's gang
rolled into town. I wish she would've been a
little bit more adamant about that. There are a
few times when I wish-- but it all happens just
like real life can. It's all development.
Sometimes things just don't work out. Yeah. That
was a good question. Question? Yeah, David Tennant
again.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: How are you enjoying Ireland for
the first time?
MARISHA: I'm loving Ireland! It's been delightful,
you guys. It's amazing. We went on a walk this
morning with-- The gunpowder factory-- What?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: The Gunpowder Mills!
MARISHA: Yes, the Gunpowder Mills. Thank you.
Those. We did that, which is amazing. It's awesome
because you guys actually have history, and you
didn't bulldoze it down. It's great. Niall's been
taking us around and we're like, "Dude, look!
Look! This is a 300 year old pile of rocks, dude.
"This is nuts." Niall's like, "Eh. I don't know."
I'm like, "No, this is incredible!" because we
don't have stuff like that at home, so I'm
enjoying all the ruins and the buildings. Then we
went to Blarney today, which is great. It's good.
It's been awesome. I greatly enjoy it. I'm looking
forward to whiskey later, though, because that
hasn't happened really, so that will probably
happen. Next question? Yeah!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Has playing Dungeons & Dragons
helped you get into voice acting jobs?
MARISHA: (laughs) Matt will tell you a different
story. Matt trial-ran a lot of voices that he's
now used in games and stuff through Dungeons &
Dragons, but he's the DM, so he's 30 people,
potentially, in one game. For a long time, it was
almost like his proving ground to see which
characters he could get into. Honestly, it's a
really great acting exercise, Dungeons & Dragons
is. It's live role playing. You're trying to
pretend to be someone on the spot. Like what I was
going into earlier about strengthening other
skills, everything's always going to help.
Everything's going to help elevate your other
skills in other mediums. Since Critical Role has
started, I've definitely gotten a few jobs because
of Critical Role, which is crazy when you think
about it, that because of my Dungeons & Dragons
game, I was in LEGO Marvel, and that's true. It's
one hundred percent true. Because the producer of
LEGO Marvel is a fan of Critical Role, so he's
like, "I want Keyleth to come do a voice." I was
like, “Okay, yeah, totally.” It’s a weird reality
that I'm still wrapping my brain around. Next
question.
AUDIENCE: For LEGO Marvel, did you get any LEGOs
of yourself, or any free LEGOs?
MARISHA: I get no free LEGOs, man! They never want
to give you products. I get a Little Caesar's
Pizza commercial-- I've actually done three Little
Caesar's Pizza commercials. You guys probably
don't even have those here, do you?
AUDIENCE: No.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: It means something to me!
MARISHA: Thank you, American guy in the back!
Another, that’s right. It's a pizza chain that's
garbage. It's five-dollar pizza. You can only pick
cheese or pepperoni and they have them under heat
lamps, but you walk in and they hand you a pizza
for five bucks. It's great. It's terrible, but
it's great. I was like, "Can I get a lifetime
supply of free pizza in my contract?" and they
were like, “(laughs) No.” It was literally what
that guy did. He laughed and was like, "No." I was
like, "Really?" and he was like, "We don't even do
that for our employees." I was like, "Oh, okay."
It's so hard getting product out of companies.
They're a pain in the ass about it, to be honest.
It's sad. But they did pay me in dollars. That,
I'm a fan of.
AUDIENCE: [inaudible]
MARISHA: "Why don't I just invest in stock?" is
what I should have said. Does anyone have a
question? I think you had your hand up earlier,
right? No? I'm hallucinating that?
AUDIENCE: [inaudible]
MARISHA: That's made of a cannon?
MARISHA: You Irish. Ugh, amazing. So there's
parades made out of a cannon. Like a bright--
AUDIENCE: [inaudible]
MARISHA: What she said. It explodes. How many? Two
minutes? Two minutes! All right, any last
questions? Matthew Mercer is next, you guys. You
can harass him. How about there.
AUDIENCE: Do you have a favorite NPC from Critical
Role?
MARISHA: My favorite NPC from Critical Role. I do.
I love Kima. Kima's phenomenal, and I love her
even more because I hated her when we first
started. Kima legitimately pissed me off. I went
home and I was just like, “She’s--” I'm talking to
Matt and pacing in the living room and I'm like,
"I don't trust her! Why am I the only one who
doesn't trust-- Why did Vex and Vax look at me
like I was a dick?! I'm not a dick, she's the
dick!" Matt's like-- We had our outs and now we're
cool, now we're bros. There are so many. Clarota
as well, because I love him and I hate him, and he
was a bastard, but he's so great. Of course,
Gilmore is another personal favorite who's been
with us for a while. Love Gilmore. I think we have
time for one more question? Yeah!
AUDIENCE: [inaudible]
MARISHA: I'll take you up on that. Once you’re
poor, you realize you never turn down free
alcohol. Another question? Maybe one more? Maybe
we have time for another one? One last one? Yeah.
AUDIENCE: [inaudible]
MARISHA: Does Matt roleplay NPCs at home? No.
People have asked that question, if we talk to
each other in character outside of games, even
with other actors. We try not to because we want
to save it for the game, is legitimately what it
is. We really try and save it for in-game, because
we don't want to rob anybody of missing out on fun
stuff. There might occasionally be-- Travis slips
into Grog more often than not. While we might not
necessarily talk-- I don't know, maybe that
counts. Like, "Hey, Travis, throw me a beer."
(Grog voice) "Oh, all right." We're just at
Applebee’s, man, it's cool. It's hard when we're
half of those people. I guess that's it, you guys!
Up next is Matthew Mercer.
(applause)